# My Experience with Super Metroid on the SNES

Game: Super Metroid
Publisher: Nintendo

Super Metroid is all about exploration and experimentation. The player must explore levels while defeating enemies by shooting them or putting bombs near them. Some passages are closed off so the player must find the right tool through exploration to progress into those closed off areas. The game does not hold the players hand and only tells the player what button(s) to press to use the tool, not where or how. There are specific assets that signal to the player that they are breakable or different than the other blocks and allow the player to try their assortment of tools to figure out what tool works for this specific issue. This leaves the player with a sense of accomplishment and knowledge.

The mechanics of the game are essentially creating puzzles that the player needs to combine their tools and the environment around them to solve. Lots of it feels like “if-then” style interactions. Some examples if enemy is shot a specific amount of times then the enemy to die, if rocket hits door then the door open and if character health reaches zero then character dies.  

The dynamics are that the player is moving, aiming and shooting. The player must use these inputs to clear and navigate their way through the level. The movement consists of jumping, running left and right, standing, crouching and entering a rolling stance. The aiming changes depending on what stance the character is in. While running the character can aim forward and 45 degrees up and down. While standing and crouched, the player can aim left, right, up and 45 degrees up and down. Jumping is the only way the character can shoot straight down. Shooting is simple as the projectiles shoot whichever way the character is aiming. However, the player can switch to different types of projectiles that impact the environment differently. 

The aesthetic makes the player feel powerful, challenged and gives them a sense of growth. Everything that the player does compounds on itself making the player feel like the are in control even though they maybe lost. The lack of hand holding allows players to feel like they are doing everything themselves, which is can cause frustration but when they succeed, it is even more satisfying. The fact that most enemies take very few hits and the player can take quite a lot makes the player feel they are powerful compared to their foes.
I believe the designer was attempting to make a challenging game. They succeeded in this feat with the combination of mental challenge and physical challenge of complex controller inputs. Having to remember which areas you have and haven’t been to and the combinations of items you have used to get passed specific is what makes is challenging mentally. Physically, trying to figure out when to jump or roll is very challenging, especially since rolling is a hard button combo to execute quickly.  

Some positive things I found were that the exploration was satisfying, consequences of dying were not too brutal because you learned a lot from your deaths (usually), and the feeling of going to a new area that you figured out how to unlock was very rewarding However, a few issues I had with the game was the fact that all enemies dropped health all the time. I felt like getting hit didn’t matter as long as I had full health before going into a boss room. I would often just roll pass enemies, drop bombs and keep rolling. Another issue I had was the fact that I had to press down on the D-pad twice to start rolling. 

The few things I would fix is that amount of health dropped. This can be fixed a couple of ways. First off, we could have enemies drop fewer health items. This is a simple fix and just adds a little more difficulty in the combat. Another change is that we could have the enemies not respawn. This would mean that health is a limited resource but would change the players behavior drastically. The player would be less run-and-gun and focus more on dodging and using combat with smaller enemies to heal before or after a battle with a boss. Lastly, you could add a whole new mechanic of having a shop in game where the player can buy upgrades. With the addition to this mechanic, we would have the enemies have a chance to drop either money or health. There are a whole lot of options open with a shop and would change the base game a bit too drastically, so I won’t go into much detail about this specific change.  
